

Python Programming Terminology


Understanding the basic terminology in Python programming is essential for anyone looking to become proficient in this versatile language. Here are some key terms and concepts you'll encounter frequently:

Keywords
Keywords are reserved words in Python used for specific purposes. They form the syntax of the language and cannot be used as identifiers (names for variables, functions, etc.). Examples of keywords include:

 and 
 for loops
 and 
 for boolean values
Variables
Variables are names that reference a memory location where data is stored. They are user-defined and cannot be named using keywords. For example:




x = 5

Here, 
 is stored at some memory location, and 
 is a variable referencing that location.

Functions
Functions are sequences of instructions that perform a specific task. They can take inputs, process them, and return outputs. For instance:

The 
 function displays output on the screen:



print("Hello, World!")
The 
 function takes user input:



x = input("Enter your name: ")
Classes and Objects
Classes are blueprints for creating objects. They encapsulate data for the object and methods to manipulate that data. For example, in a college management software:

A 
 class might have attributes like 
 and 
, and methods like 
.
A 
 class might have attributes like 
 and 
, and methods like 
.
Objects are instances of classes.

In Python, everything is an object, including primitive data types like integers and strings.

Modules and Packages
Modules are Python files that contain related code, such as functions and classes. They help in organizing and reusing code. For example:




import math
print(math.factorial(5))
Packages are collections of modules organized in directories. They help manage large codebases by grouping related modules. A package may contain sub-packages and modules:

college/
    __init__.py
    student.py
    teacher.py
    courses/
        __init__.py
        cs_course.py
        ec_course.py
Importing Modules
To use a module in another module, you use the 
 statement. For example:




import math
print(math.sqrt(16))
If a module is part of a package, you use dotted notation:




from college.student import Student
Python Path
The Python Path is an environment variable that specifies the directories where Python looks for modules. When you import a module, Python searches for it in the following order:

1. The current directory

2. Directories listed in the 
 environment variable

3. Standard library directories



Practice | GeeksforGeeks | A computer science portal for geeks
